---
layout: post
title: Yuan 2021 Nature Climate Change
categories: [1paperAday]
tags: [microbiome, network analysis]
---

# Title: Climate warming enhances microbial network complexity and stability

## Abstract:

Unravelling the relationships between network complexity and stability under changing climate is a challenging topic in theoretical ecology that remains understudied in the field of microbial ecology. 
大的科学问题：网络的复杂性与稳定性之间的关系，背景：气候变化，系统：微生物网络。

Here, we examined the effects of long-term experimental warming on the complexity and stability of molecular ecological networks in grassland soil microbial communities. 
实验：草原土壤微生物群落长期增温实验 

Warming significantly increased network complexity, including network size, connectivity, connectance, average clustering coefficient, relative modularity and number of keystone species, as compared with the ambient control. 
与背景处理相比，增温显著的提高了网络的复杂性，具体体现在：network size, connectivity, connectance, average clustering coefficient, relative modularity and number of keystone species的增加。

Molecular ecological networks under warming became significantly more robust, with network stability strongly correlated with network complexity, supporting the central ecological belief that complexity begets stability. 
分子生态网络（这是啥？）

Furthermore, warming significantly strengthened the relationships of network structure to community functional potentials and key ecosystem functioning. These results indicate that preserving microbial ‘interactions’ is critical for ecosystem management and for projecting ecological consequences of future climate warming.

Molecular Ecological Networks (MEN): because the association networks in microbial ecology are typically reconstructed on the basis of molecular markers so they refer to them as molecular ecological networks (MENs). The original 