---
layout: post
title: How to activate mamba in R
categories: [R]
tags: [mamba][env]
---

I'd like to run PICRUST2 in R so I don't need to run it from a terminal by myself. I've installed the PICRUST2 environment via conda the first time, but due to my stupidness, I installed it inside another environment! The second time I tried to install it, for some reason the same steps for conda environment did not work. Therefore I installed mamba and then an environemtn for PICRUST2.

However when I tried to activate my PICRUST2 environment via mamba by `mamba activate picrust2`, it complains that 

	Run 'mamba init' to be able to run mamba activate/deactivate and start a new shell session. Or use conda to activate/deactivate.
	
Therefore I added `mamba init` to the command but the complain persists as if the mamba initiated does not work for the next command. This must be something I do not understand about the shell that a command is run via `system` or `system2` in R.

I looked up how to activate conda environment in R. This post is perticularly helpful.

Firstly I tried to activate my env in R, which was successful.

	  # activate PICRUST2
	  if ('picrust2' %in% conda_list()[[1]]){
	    use_condaenv('picrust2', required = TRUE)
	  }else{
	    print('no picrust2 environment')
	  }

However, when I tried to run `picrust2_pipeline.py` via `system`, R acted like I've never activated `picrust2`. 

Someone else suggested indicating the python in the picrust2 env:

	path2python <- '/home/user/mambaforge/envs/picrust2/bin/python'
	use_python(path2python, required = TRUE)
	
This also did not work.

Then I tried to indicate the full path to `picrust2_pipeline.py` in the system call. This works until `picrust2_pipeline.py` needs further excutables from the `picrust2` environment, including `place_seq.py`, `epa-ng`,`gappa`, `hsp.py`,`metagenome_pipeline.py`,`pathway_pipeline.py` (don't ask why I know!) They are all in the same path as `picrust2_pipeline.py` and soft-linking them to one of my current paths worked (totally cheating). Specifically for picrust2, you need to install the `castor` package in R. Oh my, runing R inside python inside R!

Of course a more reasonable solution would be adding the path to picrust2 (/home/user/mambaforge/envs/picrust2/bin/) to the $PATH. 

So, my current answer to the title of this article is, no, you cannot enter a conda environment in R console. However one realization I had was that you can activate your mamba environment via conda. So `conda activate picrust2` also works.







